mr. Chomsky that impotence of voters are
angry impotence as you talk about
presumably you'd say that is what is
responsible for the rise of Donald Trump
is it it's pretty clear what is
responsible for the rise of the support
for Trump and there's general agreement
about it if you take a simple look at
economic statistics the primary support
for for Trump is coming from mostly
white working-class poor people who've
been cast by the wayside during the
neoliberal period they've lived through
a generation of stagnation or decline
real male wages are about what they were
in the 1960s other has been that's also
been a decline in functioning democracy
the overwhelming evidence reveals that
the their even their own elected
representatives are barely reflect their
interests and concerns contempt for
institutions especially Congress has
just increased skyrocket it is down
single digits often these are people who
meanwhile there has of course been
wealth wealth created it's gone into
very few hands a primary mostly into a
fraction of the top one percent indeed
what enormous opulence yes indeed and
how dangerous do you think this all is
in terms of Donald Trump for example I
mean he has been toning down some of his
most extreme pronouncements recently he
may if he ever got anywhere near power
he could be held in check by congressmen
how dangerous do you think he is to
America well the greatest danger that he
and indeed every Republican candidate
poses is barely mentioned it's kind of
reminiscent of Sherlock Holmes's dog
that did not bark the greatest danger is
the group there are two
huge dangers that the human species
faces we're now on a situation where we
have to decide whether the species
survives in any decent form one is the
rising danger of nuclear war which is
quite serious the other is environmental
catastrophe now on these issues Donald
Trump and the other Republican
candidates are basically uniformed I
don't believe the threat of new clue do
you believe that Hillary Clinton the
Democratic frontrunner would champion
those issues and in a way that we
satisfy you not in any way that would
satisfy me but at least she recognizes
that climate change is going on and that
we have to do something about it every
single Republican candidate denies that
it's happening with the sole exception
of Kasich who says sure it's happening
but we shouldn't do anything about it
and that's having an impact the Paris
negotiations last December were aiming
at a treaty they couldn't reach it for a
simple reason the Republican Congress
would not accept it so it's a voluntary
agreement which means even the weak
standards that were proposed will be
barely maybe it undermines the
likelihood that even they will be met
every Republican candidate including
Trump wants to eliminate the
Environmental Protection Agency Richard
Nixon's legacy to cut back regulation to
race toward the precipices quickly as
possible on militarism every one of them
wants to raise the huge military budget
already over half of discretionary
spending leading right now that's one
factor leading to confrontations which
could be extremely hazardous and briefly
I think this is not being discussed in
people like suggest one thing perhaps
that you might agree with Donald Trump
on would be about the EU I mean he talks
about the fact that
the UK may leave the EU you've railed
against European Union bureaucracy could
you agree with him on that no I don't in
fact I actually have no real strong
opinion on brexit but I've haven't my
concern about it would be that it would
weaken the European Union but it would
also probably leave Britain even more
than what I used to strong a word
subordinate to u.s. power than it is
today
which I don't think would be a good
thing for the world or Britain what in a
nutshell is the answer to who rules the
world now there as I try to discuss in
the book there is no simple answer we
usually think of states when that
question is raised and with regard to
States there's no doubt that the United
States despite its decline for many many
years is still overwhelmingly more
powerful than any state or group of
states but that's the only one factor
states have internal structures an
internal distribution of fact of power
in the United States power is
overwhelmingly and increasingly in
recent years in the hands of a very
narrow sector of corporate wealth
private wealth and power so that's and
they have counterparts elsewhere who
agree with them who interact with them
largely and that's another dimension in
who rules the world as also the public
the public can have sometimes does have
enormous power we can go back to David
Hume first major modern work on
political philosophy foundations of the
theory of government pointed out that
force is on the side of the governed
those who are governed have the force if
they are willing to and eager to and
recognize the possibility to exercise it
sometimes they do that's a major force
and who rules the world
but when it comes to state power you
don't buy the idea of China as the next
superpower the imminent superpower China
I'm in China had the China's plays a
very important role in the world
undoubtedly if you take a look at say
per capita income it's far behind the
United States and other developed States
it has an enormous internal problems a
demographic ecological resources and so
on it's undoubtedly going to play an
important in military terms it's not
even a fraction of the United States and
Western powers so it's yes and
economically it's significant but bear
in mind that a good deal of Chinese
production is actually foreign owned
Apple world's major corporation happens
to produce in China largely but that's a
US production which happens to use
Chinese facilities labor and and other
facilities so China is a growing
developing power and some domains in
fact it's gone quite far even in the
high technology industry so for example
in production of solar panels China is
in the lead not just in mass production
but also in innovation and the high-tech
development and all of this is
significant but is by no means of power
or on the scale of the United States in
fact take a look at the confrontations
between China and the United States now
there are serious confrontations are
they in the Caribbean are they off the
coast of California no they're in waters
around China where China and others have
territorial claims those that's symbolic
reflection of the nature of state power
well you describe your scathing about
the United States no one will be
surprised to hear that you describe it
as a leading
terrorists state I'm just interested to
how you describe Russia how I describe
Richard authoritarian brutal harsh
carrying out ugly actions in its own
region the United States on the other
hand carries out such actions all over
the world in fact again look at the
there are serious confrontations between
Russia and the United States and once
again are they on the Mexican border the
Canadian border no they're on the
Russian border in fact right at the
point of the traditional invasion route
through which Russia has been virtually
destroyed several times in the past
century also earlier history again
that's no apologetics for what Putin may
be doing but it's a should lead us to
understood a rational perspective on the
relationship between these forces in the
world as for the u.s. being the leading
terror state I should say that's hardly
just my opinion so for example I noted
when I was introduced the interview the
person who introduced me said that I
regard the United States as the gravest
threat the world peace that's not
exactly as a little misrepresents the
situation there are international polls
run by the leading US polling agency
Gallup it's international affiliate
Gallup wind and one of the questions
they ask is which country is the gravest
threat to world peace and the United
States is first by a huge margin far
behind in second place is Pakistan
that's undoubtedly inflated by the
Indian vote and others are have slight
mentioned so that's global opinion and I
should mention that this is was not even
reported in the United States
to be reported by BBC but wasn't
reported in the United States as for
being a terrorist State President
Obama's global assassination campaign
drone assassination campaign is extreme
a terrorist war I mean if Iran let's say
was carrying out a campaign to
assassinate people around the world who
would thought might be planning to harm
Iran we would regard it as terrorism for
example if they were bombing the
editorial offices of The New York Times
in the Washington Post which publish op
eds by prominent figures saying that we
should bomb Iran right now not wait so
obviously they want to harm Iran suppose
Iran was assassinating them and anybody
who happened to be standing around all
over would we regard that as terrorism I
think we would well let me put a few
questions to you from people online
people are sending in questions by our
facebook first gary says what are the
dangers of TTIP of Putin the danger
Laurie what are the dangers of TTIP of T
the tramatic trade and partnership TTIP
TTIP otti oh yeah oh they're pretty
extreme in fact Greenpeace a couple of
days ago released 280 pages of internal
documents on this so-called trade
agreement and they spell out details of
what all of us should know the so-called
free trade agreements are not free trade
agreements in fact to a large extent
they're not even trade agreements these
are investor right agreements there's a
reason why they're kept secret from the
public and as soon as you look at them
you see why notice I say secret from the
public not secret they're not kept
secret they're not secret to the
the corporate lawyers and lobbyists who
are writing the detailed regulations of
course in the interests of their
constituents not doesn't happen to be
the public of the world of their own
countries so these are highly
protectionist for the benefit of private
power so-called intellectual property
rights raised effectively raised tariffs
they're called patents but very wit
which have an enormous impact on
economies great wonderful for
pharmaceutical and media core
conglomerates and others the the right
for the the investors corporations are
given the right to sue governments
something you and I can't do but a
corporation can to sue governments for
harming their future potentially future
profits you can figure out what that
means in such cases already in the
courts for they're not in the courts
they go to private trade adjudication
groups made up largely of corporate
representatives they're already going on
with NAFTA and we can expect more of
them there are provisions that undermine
efforts at regulation including
incidentally regulation of environmental
of the dangers and rather strikingly the
phrase climate change does not appear in
these 280 pages which are illustrative
of the whole structure so these that
they have almost no I should say these
these agreements so-called Pacific at
Atlantic have virtually no effect on
tariffs tariffs are already quite low
among the major trading partners when
you read the propaganda about it it says
oh yeah Shore Vietnam is going to have
to lower its tariffs yeah almost no
effect on trade the major trading
partners have already have
agreements that have reduced tariffs
very substantially there are few
exceptions not many so these are baited
disabuse ourselves of the illusion that
these are free trade agreements anything
but and to a large extent not even trade
agreements we have the experience of
others like NAFTA many years of
experience so it's takes a NAFTA it has
all of the aspects that I just described
but even more consider even what is
called trade interactions across the
us-mexico border
they've increased substantially since
NAFTA so economists will tell you trade
is greatly increased but have a look at
them so for example suppose that General
Motors produces parts in Indiana sends
them to Mexico to for assembly and sells
the car in Los Angeles
that's called trade in both directions
but it's not its interactions internal
to a command economy
it's as if during the days of the Soviet
Union parts were made saying Leningrad
sent the Warsaw for assembly and sold in
Moscow that we wouldn't call that trade
that's interactions internal to a
command economy well Noam Chomsky thank
you very much for being so generous with
your time and for staying on to have
that live online discussion thank you